Hello, everyone, in this video.
Part two of this lesson we're picking up right where we left off, so we're still working on the update
or edit feature for an item, and we've already set things up so that when you click on the edit button.
You can type in new text.
Hello, there.
And we are successfully receiving that value within our node server.
So now our goal for this video is to write node code, to actually talk to our MongoDB database and
update the correct document with that new value.
So without further ado, let's get started on that from within your server.
James file I want you to scroll down to the very bottom.
So this is where we set up our express server to receive that incoming post request to the URL of update
item.
And then just as a test, we were logging that value to the console.
But what we actually want to do here is communicate with our MongoDB database.
So let's do this.
Let's delete that console that log line and also delete this response dot send line.
Let's just give ourselves a clean, empty slate within the body of this function.
All right.
And then type this out with me so deep because we want to begin working with our database.
Let's look inside it and call the collection method.
We are interested in our collection that is named items.
All right.
And then at the end here, we know that we can tack on and call a crud method.
In this case, what we want to do is find one and update.
Yes, this is perhaps the most descriptive method name that you'll ever see.
This method will find one document in your collection and then allow you to update it.
Now, within the parentheses for this method, we want to give it three arguments.
So as a placeholder, let's say a comma, be Kamasi.
All right, this first argument is where we tell MongoDB which document we want to update.
For now, let's just leave this as the a placeholder, and we can circle back to this in a few minutes.
For the time being, let's focus on the be placeholder or the second argument.
This is where we told MongoDB what we want to update on that document.
Let me show you what I mean.
So instead of this, be placeholder, let's create a JavaScript object.
So curly brackets and inside it, let's include a property with a very special name.
We have to give it a name of dollar sign set.
Then let's say colon, and let's set that to equal another JavaScript object.
So another pair of curly brackets.
And then this is where you say which fields or properties you actually want to update.
Now, in our case, because our to do application is so simple, our documents only really have the
one property named text.
However, it's very common for Mongo DB documents to have many different fields or properties.
So the idea here is that you only need to provide the fields of properties that are actually being updated.
You do not need to include the full document here only include what's being changed so we can just say
text and then set that to whatever our user typed in and submitted to our server.
So request body DHCP text.
All right, that takes care of that second argument.
Now let's work on the C placeholder or the third argument.
This is where we include a function that will get called once this database action has had a chance
to complete.
So instead of this C placeholder at the end here, let's include an anonymous function function, parentheses,
curly brackets within the body of that new function that we just created.
Let's just send back a response to the browser, right?
This is what happens once our database update action is complete.
Let's just say response dot send and let's just pass a string of text and say success.
All right.
Now all that's missing is this first argument or the a placeholder.
Again, this is where we tell MongoDB which document we want to update.
So that means that when a user clicks on one of our edit buttons, not only do we want to receive the
text that they typed in, but we need to keep track of which item they click the edit button for.
Now, you might be wondering how in the world can we do that?
Well, this is where the ID field of a MongoDB document comes into play.
If you jump into your MongoDB Atlas account and click on collections and then view your to do app items
collection, you'll notice that each document that we created in addition to our text, property or
field also has an underscore ID field.
And you can see that each one is unique by grapes.
Ends in eighty to DC walk.
The dog ends in two eight four four.
You get the idea.
So let's do this.
Let's.
Just our HTML template that gets sent for the home page to include that I.D. value for each one of our
items.
Let me show you what I mean.
Let's jump back into our server, not file and scroll up to where we have our HTML template for the
home page.
Scroll down in this HTML template until you find the area with the unordered list.
OK, and this item's dot map area is where we included a bit of each HTML that will be repeated once
for each of our items.
What we're looking for is this edit button.
So here we see the opening button tag and the closing button tag, and here it says the word edit.
Here's what I want you to do on the opening button tag.
Let's add a new attribute, and let's call it data dash IDE.
You could name it data dash anything data dash pizza data dash unicorn.
But the first part should be data dash.
This is an HTML five feature that lets us embed data right in our HTML.
So let's say data dash, I'd set it to equal and then quotes.
And in the quotes, just like we used this syntax to output the actual text, field or property, let's
do the same thing here only with the ID.
So let's say dollar sign curly brackets to do something dynamic within a template literal.
And then let's just look inside our item.
So Item Dot and we're interested in underscore I'd do make sure that you include this underscore here.
That's a potentially frustrating typo to miss.
Just I'd will not work, right?
That unique ID that MongoDB automatically generates for each document for us is underscore ID, not
just ID.
All right, now, if we go ahead and save this file and then refresh in the browser, I want you to
right click on one of the edit buttons and choose Inspect.
Perfect.
There's the button element, and our data I'd attribute is set to that unique ID.
So now each one of our edit buttons has a unique ID associated with it.
Now we just need to adjust our browser based JavaScript so that when we use Axios to send off our asynchronous
request to our server, not only do we send along the text that the user typed in, but we also send
along the appropriate I.D. so that we can tell Mongo which document the user wants to update.
I know that was a mouthful, so let me explain what I mean.
Back in our text editor, I want you to jump in to our browser JS file.
Remember, this is the code that's going to run any time we user clicks on one of those edit buttons.
Now, within this ActionScript post line, I want to focus on this object or this data that we are sending
to our server at the moment.
This object we're sending only has the one property name text.
But check this out right after user input.
Let's just add a comma and let's include a new property.
We can name it anything we'd like.
Let's go with ID and then colon.
And what do we want to set its value to?
Well, we just want to pull in that data ID value for whichever button just got clicked on.
So check this out.
Back in our code, we know that we can use E Dot Target to access the HTML element that was actually
clicked on.
So for this ID property right here, let's just say.
E Dot Target Dot get attribute, which is a method, so include a new set of parentheses or getting
an attribute of that particular element, and in these parentheses, we just include a string of text
and name the attribute that we are interested in.
So that's data dash IED.
OK, so now when Axios sends off our request to our server, not only are we sending along the new desired
updated text, but we are also sending along which document should be updated.
So let's go ahead and save this file.
And now we just need to jump back into Server Dot Jess and scroll down to the very bottom and within
this post request for the URL of update item.
Remember, we just need to fill in this a placeholder.
This is where we tell Mongo which document we want to update.
So instead of that, a placeholder, I want you to include a JavaScript object.
So curly brackets, and we want to find a document based on its IDE.
So within these brackets, let's say underscore IDE and then colon, and let's set it to whatever IDE
was just sent along from this request.
But MongoDB works with IDs in a special way, so we cannot just include a simple string of text here.
Instead, we need to create a new instance of something called object IDE in parentheses to call it,
and that's an uppercase O and then an uppercase ie, but lowercase D.
Now this object ID is not a built in part of JavaScript.
Instead, it's a tool from the MongoDB package.
So up at the very top of our file, let's be sure to import it.
So on this line of code where we are d structuring the MongoDB package right after Mongo client still
in those curly brackets, we can just add a comma.
And let's say we also want to pull in object IDE.
Cool.
Now let's just scroll back down to where we were actually using object ID.
All right now, within these parentheses, that's where we can include that simple string of text representation
of the IDE.
So we know that that was in our request object and it lives within the body object and the name of that
property was IED.
OK, and with this in place now, let's save this file and test it out.
So back in the browser, if I refresh, you do want to be sure to refresh so your browser based JavaScript
will have that new ability of sending along the IDE in its request.
All right.
But if I click on the edit button for this first buy grapes item and say Buy two bags of grapes today
and submit, we won't see any change on the front end.
But if I go look at my MongoDB database in Atlas.
Right.
So click on collections and then to do app and look in the items collection.
You can click on the Find or reset button here to refresh or reload all of the data.
And awesome, you can see that that new text was successfully updated on the correct document in the
database just to test it out again, let's edit the walk the dog item to include several exclamation
points at the end, so I'll click Edit for Walk the dog, say walk the dog exclamation.
Submit that and then go refresh in MongoDB Atlas.
Click this Find button or reset.
Cool, so we still only have five total documents, and you can see Walk the Dog now has a bunch of
exclamations.
This means that the database aspect of our update feature is complete, but our user interface aspect
is not complete, right?
As soon as that database action is complete, our front end should update on the fly.
Now, if we perform a hard refresh, if we actually reload or refresh the page, we will see those new
values.
But the user should not have to refresh like that as soon as they type in their new text, it should
just appear in place.
So let's do this in your text editor.
I want you to jump into browser jazz.
You'll remember in our last video, we wrote this comment or reminder to ourselves that says, Do something
interesting here in the next video.
So within the body of this function here, this is what will run once our Axios request has had a chance
to complete.
And we know that our node server is not going to send back its response until its database action is
complete.
That means that where this comment is will be the perfect time to actually manipulate the HTML interface
or the current item to show the new input text.
So let me show you how I would do that.
Let's get rid of this comment.
And the first question is, how do we know which item to update or which little piece of text to update?
Well, let's just begin with whichever edit button was clicked on.
So we know that we can access that with dot, target and then whichever button got clicked on.
Let's just look for it's each HTML ancestor element.
So we can say dot parent element, and I won't bore you with the structure of our HTML template, but
we actually want to go up one more level and look for the parent of even this element.
So dot parent element again.
So that will select the overall row for the current item.
And then let's do this.
Let's just look for that span of text that houses the actual text value.
So after the second parent element, we can say dot query selector, which is a method, and then we
can just give it a string of text and say Dot item dash text.
If you go dig through our HTML template, you will see that there is a span element with this exact
class of item dash text and that's wrapped around the actual text value.
So then let's just look inside that for its inner HTML property and set that to equal whatever value
the user typed into the prompt, which we stored in a variable named user input.
All right now, with this line of code in place, that's going to update this part of the user interface
once our database action is complete.
So let's be sure to save that browser JSE file and then let's refresh on the front end and let's test
it out.
I will click on the edit button for buy coffee and I will change it to buy lots of coffee.
Click OK, awesome.
You can see that was updated in real time.
And just to confirm if we go into Atlas and reset that database.
There we can see by lots of coffee.
All right, and finally, let's make two more tiny changes that will improve the user experience.
First, let's set it up so that when the user clicks the edit button, the prompt is pre-populated with
the current or existing value instead of being completely blank.
After we do that, let's also set things up so that if the user clicks cancel instead of OK, we don't
even send off an asynchronous request because check this out if I click Cancel.
Our Axios request still was sent off, but it didn't have a value.
So now you can see it's blank.
So let me put that back to buy coffee, and let's set up the first feature where we pre populate that
prompt field with the current value.
So back in our browser jazz file on this line of code where we open that prompt and say, enter your
desired new text right after the closing quote for that string of text.
If we add a comma, we can include a second argument that will be pre-populated into the prompt so we
could just say hello.
But instead of that, we want to dynamically take the current or existing value.
So to do that, let's begin with the edit button that was clicked on.
And then just look up its HTML ancestry and do the same thing.
We can find the span element again.
So type this out with me for the second argument.
Here we will say e dot target dot parent element dot parent element dot query selector, which is a
method, and then just give it quotes and a dot to represent a class and say Item Dash text.
OK, and then in between these two closing parentheses right after the first one, we want to include
a dot and look for the inner HTML property, which will pull in the text value of the span element.
OK, let's go ahead and save this file and refresh in the browser.
And now when I click on Edit for Buy Coffee, you can see that that's pre-populated in the field.
Cool.
This feels like more of the edit behavior that a user would expect.
So then they can change it if they see fit and we are in business.
Now, finally, let's set things up so that if the user clicks on edit and then changes their mind and
clicks cancel, the item is not set to a blank value.
Let me put that back to buy coffee really quick.
OK, back in our code, all we need to do is wrap the Axios code within an if statement.
So do this with me.
Select from the beginning of Axios down five lines to where the closing curly bracket and parentheses
are.
So I have five lines of code selected.
Let's cut that into our clipboard.
And write an if statement, say if parentheses curly brackets within the condition for our if statement,
let's say if user input.
That's all we need.
As long as this is not blank, right?
And this represents the value of what they typed into the prompt.
As long as this exists and is not blank, it will evaluate to true.
So then within the body of our if statement, just paste back in your clipboard.
Cool.
Let's go ahead and save that and refresh in the browser.
Now, if I click on Edit for my coffee but changed my mind and click Cancel, everything is still fine.
Awesome.
And that brings this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we will learn how to set up the functionality for our delete buttons.
Let's keep our momentum rolling, and I will see you in the next lesson.